[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: music
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: who's been writing about economics and covering the government for over 17 years now. Pooja
[Amit Varma]: has been the economics editor of the Hindu and has won the Ramnath Goenka Excellence
[Amit Varma]: in Journalism Award in 2008 and 2009. And she's just released a fascinating book called
[Amit Varma]: India's Lost Decade, which chronicles the 10 years between 2008 and 2018, and describes
[Amit Varma]: how those were years of lost potential for us, in which a series of bad decisions by
[Amit Varma]: multiple Prime Ministers and multiple Finance Ministers harmed the Indian economy, and by
[Amit Varma]: extension, millions of Indians, especially the poor. I've admired Pooja's writing on
[Amit Varma]: economics for a long time, and I picked up the book expecting a really good read on economics.
[Amit Varma]: But it's a lot more than that. Firstly, the thrust of the book is the impact of politics
[Amit Varma]: on economics and is filled with political insight. Secondly, the book is packed with
[Amit Varma]: human drama. Of the sort, the likes of Shakespeare would have turned into multiple plays. Like
[Amit Varma]: my God, this book is tales of so many petty resentments, grand ambitions, mad delusions,
[Amit Varma]: petty lint arrogance, and a series of human follies that are all the rational acts of
[Amit Varma]: flawed humans. It's fascinating and I was delighted when Pooja agreed to come and chat
[Amit Varma]: with me about the book. Just one thing though, our conversation was recorded over Skype over
[Amit Varma]: iffy connections. The sound quality is sometimes dubious and calls keep dropping. I apologise
[Amit Varma]: for that. The subject is so fascinating that I think it was worth the trouble, and I think
[Amit Varma]: you'll agree. But before we get to the conversation, a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This episode of the scene in the unseen is brought to you by Storytel. Storytel is an
[Amit Varma]: audiobook platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app. They have thousands
[Amit Varma]: of audiobooks that you can listen to on your mobile, including hundreds in local languages
[Amit Varma]: like Hindi and Marathi. An unlimited monthly subscription costs only Rs. 2.99 per month,
[Amit Varma]: and you can also get a 30-day free trial if you hop on over to Storytel.com. I actually
[Amit Varma]: use Storytel myself regularly, so as long as they sponsor this show, I'm going to recommend
[Amit Varma]: one book a week that I love. The book I'm recommending today is a book called Back When
[Amit Varma]: We Were Grown Ups by Anne Tyler. Now, one of the interesting things about dialogue in
[Amit Varma]: books is that it is very different from how we speak in real life. In real life, we don't
[Amit Varma]: speak in a linear structure. One person finishes, then the other person starts. But often one
[Amit Varma]: over the other, two people speaking at the same time, thoughts colliding. To my mind,
[Amit Varma]: no fiction writer captures real life dialogues better than the brilliant Anne Tyler, many
[Amit Varma]: of whose books are available on Storytel. Back When We Were Grown Ups is a personal
[Amit Varma]: favorite though, so do check it out. And remember, you get a 30-day free trial only at Storytel.com
[Amit Varma]: slash IVM. Pooja, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Hi, thank you. Thanks for having
[Amit Varma]: me over. Pooja, before we start talking about your book, The Lost Decade, tell me something
[Amit Varma]: about your journey so far. How did you get interested in economics? And how did you become
[Guest]: an economic journalist? Okay, so it's by accident, I did not make a conscious decision to either
[Guest]: study economics or join journalism. When I was in school, I actually first I wanted to
[Guest]: be a lawyer. And then I wanted to join the civil services. And those were the two options
[Guest]: I was very keen on. But my family dissuaded me from both and not a very, I mean, you know,
[Guest]: very light conversations, no serious discussions, but mostly they would be like, No, you may
[Guest]: not like that, you know, those are tough jobs and all that. And so I hadn't really given
[Guest]: much thought to what I wanted to do. And my cousin, who's a big influence on me, took
[Guest]: up economics. And he's one year ahead of me. And he took up economics. And just because
[Guest]: he had taken up economics, I also applied for economics, although I was a science student.
[Guest]: And I got through in Kamla Nehru College, which tends to have a high cutoffs and is
[Guest]: considered a good college in Delhi University for economics after Stephens, LSR and SRCC
[Guest]: it's considered quite good. And I didn't want to let go of that seat. So, you know, so sort
[Guest]: of following in the footsteps of my cousin, I took up economics. And I found that a year
[Guest]: after he finished his first year of economics, and by the time I had already joined, he decided
[Guest]: he didn't like economics, and he switched over to physics. He restarted his graduation
[Guest]: doing physics, but I carried on with economics, I was beginning to enjoy the subject, I had
[Guest]: a good set of friends in college and all that. And I finished graduation and there was a
[Guest]: lot of sort of peer pressure, everybody was sitting for their CAT exam, and people were
[Guest]: considering where to do their MBA and all that. And there's this one friend of mine
[Guest]: in college who, you know, one day told me that a couple of days later, she was planning
[Guest]: to go to the North Campus where she wanted to apply for the entrance exam for Delhi School
[Guest]: of Economics for a master's in economics. And she was looking, you know, for basically
[Guest]: somebody to go along with her and if I was interested. And I said that, you know, if
[Guest]: you're applying for a master's, I will also. And we both went and applied, we sat for the
[Guest]: entrance exam, and she never made it and I did. And so I joined Delhi School of Economics
[Guest]: and I found it really, really difficult. They really expect you to work very hard. And most
[Guest]: of my batchmates started preparing for their, you know, they wanted to do their PhDs overseas
[Guest]: and I could tell that I would not be able to work that hard. And therefore, I put in
[Guest]: my request in the placement cell for placements. Now, this is the year 2000, where the economy
[Guest]: was not doing very well. And there were very few job offers and therefore, relative to
[Guest]: the number of students and therefore, they had a rule. And the rule was that, you know,
[Guest]: if you get a job offer after sitting for an interview, and you don't accept it, then you
[Guest]: have to wait for everybody else to get placed and only then you can apply for another interview.
[Guest]: And my first job offer came from a newspaper, Business Standard. And therefore, the choice
[Guest]: for me was whether to accept that or to not accept that and risk not getting any other
[Guest]: job at all, because I have to wait for everybody else to get placed. And that's how I joined
[Guest]: Business Standard financial paper. And that's how I sort of came to business journalism.
[Guest]: Because nobody in my family is a journalist, and I'd never thought of journalism as a career
[Guest]: option. And I landed in business journalism. And I quite liked it. I had good colleagues
[Guest]: and very good bosses and editors, and I've just stayed on. So that's how I came to economic
[Amit Varma]: journalism.
[Amit Varma]: Well, thank God for us, you stayed on. And it's interesting how you know, when you describe
[Amit Varma]: the role of happenstance in your life, and reading your book, it struck me, as we'll
[Amit Varma]: discuss later how happenstance and events that seem unconnected with economics actually
[Amit Varma]: played such a big role in what subsequently happened. So tell me, you know, when you were
[Amit Varma]: starting, yeah, so tell me when you were sort of starting off, getting into economics, doing
[Amit Varma]: journalism and all of that, who were the thinkers who influenced you? Like, what were the kind
[Amit Varma]: of books that had an influence on you? And importantly, over the period of time, from
[Amit Varma]: the time you studied economics in college to let's say today, how have your thoughts
[Amit Varma]: on economics per se evolved?
[Guest]: Right. So, you know, unlike how it is in JNU, in Delhi School of Economics, the way they
[Guest]: teach you economics is very different. There's an influence of market economics led thinking.
[Guest]: And consciously or unconsciously, there are these giants, you know, there, and especially
[Guest]: because I was in college, you know, before 2000. So the big influences at that point
[Guest]: in time on campus in the school and therefore on me, were people like Dr. Manmohan Singh,
[Guest]: you know, Montek Singh Ahluwalia. So their reputation at that point was a little different
[Guest]: than what it is now. And there was a scholarship in college named after Dr. Manmohan Singh,
[Guest]: and Professor Kaushik Basu, and people like that, you know, and our teachers were very
[Guest]: clear that, you know, the market economy is the way to go forward. And we didn't have
[Guest]: textbooks for every topic, we had a series of readings. So, you know, few paras from
[Guest]: various writers, most of them international economists, very few Indian writers we had,
[Guest]: you know, in our course curriculum material. So, at that point in time in college, most
[Guest]: of my reading on economics was limited to what was prescribed in course. Thereafter,
[Guest]: after I joined, you know, Business Standard, I found that a lot of what was taught in class,
[Guest]: I was, especially because I had macroeconomics and public finance as my optional papers,
[Guest]: a lot of that I was beginning to see how it plays out, you know, in the real economy,
[Guest]: and all the various manifestations of it. And honestly, I did not read much of anything
[Guest]: in the first few years of my career related to economics. So I didn't, at that point read,
[Guest]: you know, Amartya Sen or Raghuram Rajan when his book came out later. I read all of that
[Guest]: quite late. And I don't think, you know, other than what I had learned in class, I don't
[Guest]: think I had too many influences in terms of what I had read. By the time I started reading
[Guest]: all these big names, I myself had well formed ideas about what goes on in the economy, based
[Guest]: on what I was taught in class and how I'd seen it play out, you know, in the real economy
[Guest]: in India.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So, you know, before we start talking about the last decade, which is really about
[Amit Varma]: the last 10 years, and how we sort of lost the way, you know, turned it back a little
[Amit Varma]: bit and then lost away again, I'd like you to set a little bit of context in terms of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I often as someone who grew up in the 80s and the 90s, I often take it for granted
[Amit Varma]: that my shared experiences are shared by everyone. But I often forget that 60% of India today
[Amit Varma]: was born after the liberalisation of 91. And that's such an important turning point in
[Amit Varma]: our economy. So can you sort of give me a sense of what our economy was like, say from
[Amit Varma]: independence to 91? What were the sort of guiding philosophies? And how that changed
[Amit Varma]: in 91?
[Guest]: Yes, in fact, Amit, I myself, I feel, you know, when I speak to youngsters, I feel exactly
[Guest]: the same, but they have no idea how life was, you know, before 1991, or for those of us,
[Guest]: you know, who are older, who are like past 35. And so to speak of it in terms of everyday
[Guest]: life, you'd recall that an example that is often given is, you know, you wanted to buy
[Guest]: a car, you could afford to buy a car, and your choices were limited to one or two brands,
[Guest]: you may like them, you may not like them, quality did not matter, because the quantity
[Guest]: was so less. And even for those few cars that were manufactured every year, there was a
[Guest]: long list of people waiting to buy them. And therefore, anything, you know, would go. Now,
[Guest]: in 1947, the two phases before 1991, and after 1991, I think the average person in India
[Guest]: seems to be the forgotten or doesn't realize at all, that until 1947, Indian economy had
[Guest]: been, you know, under colonial sort of control. And most of the economic policy was driven
[Guest]: by the Second World War's requirements, the Indian economy had been geared, you know,
[Guest]: the resources were being taken away, to provide for the Second World War. And, you know, be
[Guest]: it in terms of foreign exchange, be it in terms of exports, you could not import things,
[Guest]: even if you could afford them, there were regulations, they were import controls. And
[Guest]: all of these rules and regulations were written into Indian law, economic policy, which a
[Guest]: lot of it has not been shared even today, you know, those were the sort of the founding
[Guest]: principles of a lot of economic policy, and much of it was shared in 1991. But a lot of
[Guest]: it survives, we still need to, you know, get rid of those, that control mentality. And
[Guest]: what that control mentality is that before 1947, which carried on for some time after
[Guest]: that, that everything would be determined by the needs of the war. So you have to, you
[Guest]: cannot import, you know, things like steel, or if you're producing things like steel,
[Guest]: it has to be used for a certain purpose, which is determined by not what is good for the
[Guest]: rest of the economy or people like you and me, but you know, what is good for the Second
[Guest]: World War, Great Britain. Now, once that was done, when we got freedom, I think the immediate
[Guest]: response of the government at that point, with the heavy influence of Pandit Nehru was
[Guest]: that we need to reconstruct the economy, which had been under colonial rule, and which had
[Guest]: taken this huge hit because of the Second World War. And how do we do it? From what
[Guest]: we understand, the private sector was small, and not in a shape to take up the huge challenge.
[Guest]: And therefore, the public sector had to be relied on and it had to be strengthened. Now,
[Guest]: we all know how that philosophy, and of course, there was also the fear of economic imperialism,
[Guest]: we had just gained political freedom. And I think the country at that point in time
[Guest]: did not want to surrender economic freedom, and therefore the fear of foreign capital
[Guest]: and foreign investments. And I think those are the two sort of guiding principles at
[Guest]: that point in time, which led to what is called Nehruvian socialism. When we criticize Nehruvian
[Guest]: socialism, and I definitely am not a fan of it. But when we criticize it, we must remember
[Guest]: the context in which that came as a policy response. Very soon, the limitations of that
[Guest]: kind of thinking became apparent. But it was a little too late to do anything about it.
[Guest]: I think the government's attention was drawn to other things, political things, etc. And
[Guest]: this sort of carried on. And I think as Sunil Kilnani talks about in his book, Idea of India,
[Guest]: what this did deliver was that the economy was stable, it did not grow very fast, but
[Guest]: it was quite stable. Then came the Indira Gandhi variety of socialism, which had a lot
[Guest]: to do with government spending led economic policies. And also later on, nationalization
[Guest]: and those, you know, the charter, that was, I think the seven points, I think that were
[Guest]: announced. That was quite damaging. That was very, very damaging for the economy. And of
[Guest]: course, there was not much growth. But there was also a worsening of the fiscal parameters
[Guest]: and macroeconomic stability. And because these parameters were weakening, by the 80s, there
[Guest]: was a realization amongst Indian experts. And Mrs. Gandhi here and there does show some
[Guest]: openness to listening to these things, including a couple of times when Dr. Manmohan Singh
[Guest]: sort of, in various capacities, tried to explain how Indian economic policy was completely
[Guest]: off course. And some little bit corrections do begin to take place in the 80s. Bank nationalization
[Guest]: has sort of indirect good influence on India's saving rate, and therefore investment rate.
[Guest]: And those little sort of low hanging reforms that were undertaken, that were taken up in
[Guest]: the 80s, begin to show a little few results, which carries on when Rajiv Gandhi becomes
[Guest]: the Prime Minister. But after that political instability and, you know, incompleteness
[Guest]: of the reforms, inability to think through a lot of things meant that the economy was
[Guest]: not doing well. And the fiscal parameters started weakening, you know, more and more.
[Guest]: And after that, so there was this one external shock of the Gulf War, which really weakened
[Guest]: India's external position a lot, because we had been borrowing so much. And you know,
[Guest]: those were the days when the government could just print more money and pay for anything
[Guest]: that was not covered by its own revenue. So the difference between its expenditure and
[Guest]: its revenue was simply covered by printing more money. And that meant a lot of short
[Guest]: term borrowings that they kept rolling over. And therefore, you know, this like the shock
[Guest]: of the Gulf War sort of tipped the balance of payments into a dangerous zone and the
[Guest]: famous 1991 crisis happened. So that's what was the story before 1991, that a lot of bad
[Guest]: decisions, some of them under the influence of the context of those, you know, that era,
[Guest]: but some of them because of complete disregard for what is good for the economy.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's also kind of pertinent to point out that more than as much as policies that
[Amit Varma]: sort of were in place is also pertinent to point out the mindset behind them. Now, Nehru,
[Amit Varma]: who is again, a great statesman, I admire him, you know, I think India was lucky to
[Amit Varma]: have him as its first Prime Minister, but and in terms of economic policies, like you
[Amit Varma]: rightly said, I mean, the sort of soft socialism he followed was the flavor of the times and
[Amit Varma]: he wouldn't have known better at the time and he died before he could correct if he
[Amit Varma]: would have been open to it. But essentially, the two of the fundamental problems was one
[Amit Varma]: was a distrust of private enterprise and a distrust indeed of the profit motive. Like
[Amit Varma]: Nehru once famously said to JRD Tata, do not talk to me of profit, it is a dirty word.
[Amit Varma]: And that distrust meant that he looked at private enterprise as necessarily something
[Amit Varma]: that is exploitative of the people, which also, you know, brought back those memories
[Amit Varma]: of colonialism and so on. He didn't see it as a positive gig, some game it is by which
[Amit Varma]: everyone benefits and economies grow. And therefore, the second part of his mindset,
[Amit Varma]: which was so fatally flawed, as it were, was the whole command and control mindset that
[Amit Varma]: the government will do everything it will plan every aspect of the economy. And I think
[Amit Varma]: by the time we sort of knew it wasn't working and Indira came to power, Indira moved leftward
[Amit Varma]: for political compulsions as much as you know, any conviction in her economic policies, because
[Amit Varma]: she had to distinguish herself from the syndicate in the Congress, which she was fighting against
[Amit Varma]: and the leftward tilt was a sort of a rebranding. And then she went into populism of Gareebi
[Amit Varma]: Hatao and following these, you know, so called pro poor policies, or they actually hurt the
[Amit Varma]: poor more than they help them. And and this is a theme again, that you touch on in your
[Amit Varma]: book a lot. And I'm going to come back to you later and ask about that later in this
[Amit Varma]: episode about the interplay between politics and economics. And and basically, as you've
[Amit Varma]: summed up, we were sort of limping our way through making small corrections here and
[Amit Varma]: there, but the fundamental mindsets weren't changed. And would you say that the changes
[Amit Varma]: that happened in 1991, came not so much from conviction as circumstances, because we had
[Amit Varma]: that balance of payments crisis, we were in a fix, we have we had no option but to RCIMF
[Amit Varma]: for help. And these were sort of their conditionalities.
[Guest]: So, Amit, I agree with what you say on both Mrs. Gandhi and Pandit Nehru, except that
[Guest]: my small point here would be that I'm not so sure the Indian private sector, barring
[Guest]: one or two examples, such as JRD Tata, and it is absolutely wrong to I think, nationalize
[Guest]: Air India. But barring those two examples, was really our private sector willing to,
[Guest]: you know, enter into these highly competitive and long gestation high risk areas, you know,
[Guest]: where the public sector was pushed into by Pandit Nehru? I don't think so. I don't think
[Guest]: that you know, the Indian private sector was roaring to go into these areas, and they were
[Guest]: denied a chance. Private sector was not banned. Let's not forget that.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'd argue that they weren't given the opportunity in the first place. Like the example
[Amit Varma]: that I often like to give, you know, to contrast the late 80s, and just maybe seven or eight
[Amit Varma]: years later, is that is you look at something like say, telephones and airlines, you just,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in 87, 88, or so on, you had five year waiting list, 10 year waiting list for
[Amit Varma]: telephones. Yes. Airlines were outside the bounds of most Indians. And the moment those
[Amit Varma]: sectors got opened up in the private sector actually got the opportunity. You were flooded
[Amit Varma]: with both variety and value when you saw the result of competition. So today, it's hard
[Amit Varma]: to imagine that you had to wait five years to get a telephone and that to only the extremely
[Amit Varma]: privileged could afford it. So you know, in that sense, and you know, I wish things like
[Amit Varma]: agriculture and education had also been opened up in the same way.
[Guest]: Yes, but I just, you know, nuance that a little bit by saying that, you know, if you were
[Guest]: giving these permits, you know, for a limited production, you can produce this, but you
[Guest]: can only produce this much, you can't sort of that was the control, right? Now, what
[Guest]: that did was, that was not so much anti private sector, it was pro business, if you wanted
[Guest]: only a few companies to be in that sector and do well, or I mean, I'm not saying you
[Guest]: wanted to, but that's what it ended up doing, you know, that that only two car manufacturers
[Guest]: can make cars, and therefore, they do well, but, you know, but the rest who are willing
[Guest]: to make cars, there's an entry barrier, you know, what I mean? So it's not exactly anti
[Guest]: private sector. But the problem is that, you know, you're selecting one, so it's not socialism,
[Guest]: you know, it's not capitalism, you're choosing a few capitalists, who can, you know, make
[Guest]: super normal profits, but by preventing the rest of the private sector to enter that area.
[Guest]: So that is the model they've operated.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So in fact, I'll ask you a question here, which I was actually saving for later.
[Amit Varma]: But it makes sense. Now, like, you know, even in your book, you've used the two phrases
[Amit Varma]: pro business versus pro markets. And this is something I think a lot of people don't
[Amit Varma]: get that, you know, and a lot of market supporters, often, you know, they have the crony capitalism
[Amit Varma]: thrown in their faces. And, you know, what about this? And actually, what is good for
[Amit Varma]: markets and what is good for a few select businesses are very, very different things.
[Amit Varma]: Can you elaborate on the distinction between, you know, being pro business and being pro
[Amit Varma]: markets?
[Guest]: Yes, absolutely. So, you know, you're pro business, when you create a policy for a sector
[Guest]: specifying norms, where only few people can enter and qualify, and you leave out the rest,
[Guest]: then you're not pro markets, you're pro business, you're supposedly, you know, you're not saying,
[Guest]: so let's take the example of education today. You're not saying that education, only ABC
[Guest]: business houses can enter education. That's not what your policy says. But your policy
[Guest]: says that if you want to set up an engineering college, you must be able to put so much money
[Guest]: into the laboratory, you must be able to put so much money into the you know, initial permit
[Guest]: that we give you, you must be able to put everything is defined in terms of you must
[Guest]: be able to do this much, this much, this much. And when you look at that criteria, that becomes
[Guest]: exclusionary. I may not, I may be running, you know, let's not say higher education institutes,
[Guest]: but let's talk about, for instance, you know, schools, I may be running something under
[Guest]: a flyover, and I'm really good, every student I'm teaching is coming out with flying colors
[Guest]: and passing examinations, but I can't qualify to get that licensed campus, because your
[Guest]: rules are excluding me. So in this case, you're not pro markets, you're pro business, even
[Guest]: though you're not saying, you know, private sector is not allowed, you know, so this is
[Guest]: a very crude example I've given, but we see a lot of this, even today in many sectors,
[Guest]: where do you think you and I can just decide to go and set up, you know, a cell phone company,
[Guest]: or an airline, you know, we can't, we can't even if we had all that money, all that expertise
[Guest]: that those who are in that sector today have, the entry barriers into that sector are high.
[Guest]: And therefore, there is no competition. And therefore, it is not pro markets policy, it
[Amit Varma]: is still in many ways pro business policy.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly. And a lot of people don't get the distinction of what is, you know, good for
[Amit Varma]: markets and capitalism may not be what capitalists actually want. So, you know, this distinction
[Amit Varma]: is sort of important to make. Going back quickly to 91 sort of, one, were the reforms driven
[Amit Varma]: by conviction? Or were they forced by circumstance or a combination of the two? And two, how far
[Amit Varma]: do you think, you know, what difference did the reforms make? And do you think they went
[Amit Varma]: far enough? Like, where did we fall short?
[Guest]: Yeah, so it depends on whose conviction you're talking about, you know, the economists and
[Guest]: select bureaucrats, they were convinced about what had to be done, they knew exactly what
[Guest]: had to be done, even back in the 1970s. You know, there is a paper that Dr. Manmohan Singh,
[Guest]: for instance, had written, and I think if I'm not wrong, 1971, where he had said that,
[Guest]: you know, how, in fact, even his PhD thesis, he has written about how Indian policies are
[Guest]: all wrong, and you know, they will land us into trouble. So, Indian economists and Indian,
[Guest]: many of the technocrats were fully aware of what was going wrong and what needed to be
[Guest]: done. But there was no buy-in from the politicians. And there was no political conviction. By
[Guest]: 1991, I think politicians were left with no choice. And we see that the IMF lays down
[Guest]: its conditions. And Mr. Yashwant Sinha, I think was the finance minister, and he's sort
[Guest]: of not able to go through with that. The government changes, P. V. Narasimha Rao comes and he
[Guest]: begins to look for a finance minister. And he's forced to look for finance ministers
[Guest]: that the IMF will trust. His first choice is I. G. Patel. I. G. Patel declines. And
[Guest]: therefore, I think I. G. Patel suggests that, you know, Manmohan Singh would be a good option.
[Guest]: And therefore, he goes to Manmohan Singh. And Manmohan Singh comes up, I mean, he comes
[Guest]: up with his list, but already when he comes into office, on his table, there is a list
[Guest]: of things that have to be done, which have come from the IMF. But that doesn't mean that
[Guest]: if Manmohan Singh and his team of, you know, I call them the rescuers, you know, if they
[Guest]: had no list arriving from the IMF on what all needs to be done for that bailout package
[Guest]: to be approved, he had not done the same thing. I think he would have also probably come up
[Guest]: with a pretty similar list and done the same thing. And so definitely what was done was
[Guest]: because the politician could no longer postpone these decisions and could no longer tell the
[Guest]: economists and the technocrats that I'm not going to do this. And in that sense, it was
[Guest]: driven by the crisis. But I don't give much credit to the IMF for the way the reforms
[Guest]: were designed, because there's enough evidence, you know, that these things were being talked
[Guest]: up about in the Indian policy circles much before that, including in the official papers.
[Guest]: I think Rakesh Mohan has sort of documented a lot of this, especially about the industrial
[Guest]: policy and the de-licensing, etc. Yeah, so that's to talk about the conviction. What
[Guest]: the reforms did was that wherever the economy was sort of, like we discussed, putting these
[Guest]: conditions and restrictions and asking for, I mean, wherever it was operating under license,
[Guest]: those things were removed. Foreign capital was less restrictive. I mean, they had to
[Guest]: open up to foreign capital. Many areas that had been reserved exclusively for public sector
[Guest]: had to be opened. Trade barriers had to be reduced. And I think later on, I don't know
[Guest]: if this was prescribed by the IMF or not. I need to study that. But later on, I think
[Guest]: one of the biggest reforms that does not get talked about in layman's circles is, you know,
[Guest]: the understanding between the Reserve Bank of India, the governor at that point was C.
[Guest]: Rangarajan and finance ministry headed by Manmohan Singh that, you know, printing of
[Guest]: money to provide for the fiscal deficit, that will just not go on. That was a very big reform.
[Guest]: I forgot to mention that the rupee was at that point in time not floating like it is
[Guest]: now. It was a controlled, it was a fixed currency. And because of which, you know, it is an artificially
[Guest]: strong currency. So there were two rounds of devaluation, because of which the, so what
[Guest]: happens when your currency is artificially, you know, kept at a level. In the international
[Guest]: world, it costs X to buy something, for instance, petrol, you know, the price of petrol is X,
[Guest]: but your currency is artificially up there. So your economy is not responding appropriately
[Guest]: to the price movement internationally of a product because your currency is fixed. So
[Guest]: your demand internally was not adjusting properly. And by those two rounds of devaluation, that
[Guest]: was gradually corrected. And eventually, of course, you know, the rupee became floating.
[Guest]: So those were the kind of, you know, corrections in policy that took place. Now, those were
[Guest]: all good and needed to be done. But that was the very basics. The really difficult thing
[Guest]: to do was, you know, agriculture reforms, labor reforms, those have still not happened.
[Guest]: And I don't see anybody even saying that those need to be done. That was my biggest worry
[Guest]: that, you know, the political consensus, somehow, this thing doesn't even get mentioned. And
[Guest]: in that sense, you know, reforms have not graduated to the second generation and third
[Guest]: generation level. 25-26 years later, we still talk about change of FDI caps or liberalization
[Guest]: of FDI caps as a reform. I don't think that should even be called a reform now. That should
[Guest]: just be an everyday policy decision that somebody junior sitting in some ministry should be
[Guest]: able to just sign off. You know, so the word reforms itself has become so cheapened because
[Guest]: the big reforms are not, you know, taking place.
[Amit Varma]: And would it be the case, I mean, the reforms momentum slowed in the mid 90s, and then seem
[Amit Varma]: to almost disappear at some points. And part of the reason for that, if I may speculate,
[Amit Varma]: is that, you know, the urgency of those reforms was no longer felt and the old political imperatives
[Amit Varma]: came back in play. So even if for some of these period, you had, you know, people in
[Amit Varma]: the finance ministry and the finance minister himself who were reform minded, it just became
[Amit Varma]: much harder to push these reforms through. In some cases, the political impact would
[Amit Varma]: be negative. And in some cases, the political impact would be so long term in the process
[Amit Varma]: so arduous that it didn't make sense at all.
[Guest]: So you're right that, you know, politicians first love is not reforms. So they have to
[Guest]: be persuaded. Now, when you're making a case for reforms vis-a-vis other things they can
[Guest]: do, you know, what they look at is that, I mean, you know, I think the experience of
[Guest]: the Vajpayee government has sort of given a scare to our politicians, and they think
[Guest]: that reforms don't get you reelected. And reforms sort of turn masses of voters against
[Guest]: you. And to overcome that for a sitting government, I think to overcome that thought process,
[Guest]: it becomes difficult. Also, because, you know, to understand what a reform is, what it will
[Guest]: do, how it will play out in the economy is slightly difficult and wonkish. And often,
[Guest]: it's not well understood. And I think the second thing that happens is that paradoxically,
[Guest]: you know, political parties want to make their opponents seem like they are not good at their
[Guest]: economic performance. And therefore, they oppose reforms, when they are in the opposition.
[Guest]: So as it is to begin with, you know, for the sitting government, there is very little incentive
[Guest]: and they, you know, the decision makers politically have to be really explained what needs to
[Guest]: be done. And whatever little they might be willing to do, the opposition make is so noisy
[Guest]: and so obstructive, you know, that decisions become even more difficult to take. So for
[Guest]: example, let's take the example of GST. GST could have happened in the tenure of the UPA.
[Guest]: It did not happen because the BJP ruled states did not support them. This is quite discussed
[Guest]: in the book at length in the second chapter. Or you take the example of, you know, land
[Guest]: reforms and labor reforms, which the Modi government attempted, but trade unions of
[Guest]: their own, affiliated to their own political setup, opposed the labor reforms. And, you
[Guest]: know, Mr. Modi met with them, but after he heard them out, he just vanishes from his
[Guest]: agenda. And the Congress party's opposition to land reforms in parliament in 2015, again
[Guest]: push land reforms off the agenda. So it is one that, you know, politicians when they
[Guest]: are in office, economic reforms is not their agenda, is not high on their agenda. But whenever
[Guest]: it comes up, you know, when, when the reformers in our government try to push it, there is
[Guest]: so much opposition from within the political parties and from the opposition that the reformers
[Guest]: voices are getting drowned out. And we see this happening in governments ruled by all
[Guest]: shapes of the political color. It's common.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So, you know, let's kind of get to the book. Now, your book, of course, starts
[Amit Varma]: off in 2008. Get me up to speed with sort of where India is at that point economically,
[Amit Varma]: what is our trajectory? How are we sort of growing? How are we doing? And then the implications
[Amit Varma]: of the 2008 financial crisis?
[Guest]: Yes, this is the other thing, you know, which first time voters either not aware or they've
[Guest]: completely forgotten, which is that the India and the Indian economy, you know, in the in
[Guest]: the before 2008 was so different from what it is today. You know, the Tata's are buying,
[Guest]: you know, chorus and JLR, Jaguar, Land Rover, and even small, I mean, they're big companies,
[Guest]: but even small Indian companies, midsize Indian companies were going and acquiring companies
[Guest]: overseas, businesses overseas, there was so much exuberance. You'd recall, if you were
[Guest]: in a job at that point, the kind of increments we were getting, the kind of, you know, job
[Guest]: opportunities that are coming up. India was growing at 8.8%, three years consecutively
[Guest]: before 2008, India grew at 8.8%, which is unprecedented in the history of independent
[Guest]: India. A lot of this was because the world economy was booming, the cost of money was
[Guest]: very low, international interest rates were very low. And when you have very low interest
[Guest]: rates, if you can borrow money at a very low price, you know, interest rates of like 1%
[Guest]: or nearly 0%, what are you going to do, you're going to bet with that money, you know, because
[Guest]: your cost of money is so low, your risk taking ability goes up. And internationally investors
[Guest]: were looking for where to put their money so that they could get high returns. And they
[Guest]: discovered emerging markets and among emerging markets, this economy called India that had
[Guest]: started with economic reforms. And there was a lot of promise that, you know, those economic
[Guest]: reforms will be carried further. And India was going to have this huge demographic dividend
[Guest]: because a large proportion of the population was going to be young and therefore, you know,
[Guest]: earning jobs, earning incomes, and therefore spending. So India was a very attractive market
[Guest]: at that point in time. That's how the potential was. And everything seemed right. The government
[Guest]: was headed by an economist, you know, Dr. Manmohan Singh, was a very celebrated political
[Guest]: leader. The finance minister was Peter Damram. Again, he's, you know, he has this reputation
[Guest]: internationally of being a darling of investors. He had in the reforms era, in the 1990s, presented
[Guest]: what is called a dream budget, where he reduced income taxes so drastically that the, you
[Guest]: know, the collection of income taxes increased. It was a stark contrast to the, you know,
[Guest]: marginal rate of 90% during Mrs. Indira Gandhi's time. And that was a very big reform. In fact,
[Guest]: the rationalization of income taxes, he had in the 1990s, you know, taken off a whole
[Guest]: lot of, he had liberalized trade a lot. So he came with excellent credentials. And between
[Guest]: 2005 and 2007, people have forgotten this, but he had reduced the fiscal deficit so drastically,
[Guest]: not by cutting expenditure so much, more by raising more money through taxes, you know,
[Guest]: because the economy was growing so well that people were paying more taxes. And, you know,
[Guest]: the tax system at that time was not as coercive as it started becoming from the era of Pranam
[Guest]: Mukherjee when this whole tax terrorism thing came up. And the income tax to GDP ratio that
[Guest]: was achieved in 2007 has not been achieved even till today, you know, that high. And
[Guest]: so, you know, fiscally, the macroeconomic parameters looked very good. The economy looked
[Guest]: very attractive and therefore a lot of foreign investment began to come in. When the foreigners
[Guest]: discovered India and started investing here, the local, you know, companies also figured
[Guest]: that this was the time to, you know, take risk. This was the time to expand because
[Guest]: India has so much problems. If the foreigners think we are a great economy, then we really,
[Guest]: really must be a great economy. And, you know, a whole lot of investments started taking
[Guest]: place. So yeah, the economy was booming, exports were doing very well because world demand
[Guest]: for exports was quite robust. Investments were doing very well and manufacturing was
[Guest]: doing much better than it is, you know, it has ever. Now, this was the state of the economy,
[Guest]: you know, a global boom and within that an Indian boom when the global financial crisis
[Guest]: happened. The global financial crisis sort of disrupted this whole exuberance that India
[Guest]: was seeing. Sorry, I forgot to mention, which I explained in the book, which is that, you
[Guest]: know, when the cities were experiencing this boom because of all these investments, foreigners
[Guest]: coming in, a lot of hiring taking place, company expanding, getting into new businesses. What
[Guest]: that did was that, you know, the city's needs for support staff, you know, sort of grew.
[Guest]: They needed new malls, they needed a lot more drivers, they needed a lot more assistance.
[Guest]: And these requirements were supplied by the rural area. So a lot of people began to come
[Guest]: from rural India to the cities, you know, for these jobs. And that's how the gains of
[Guest]: this boom, you know, was sort of shared with the rural areas as well. And once when the
[Guest]: global financial crisis disrupts this, then it was quite serious and all kinds of changes
[Guest]: happen. You know, that's how the book begins. All kinds of changes happen in the economy
[Guest]: directly because of the crisis, but also indirectly because of the way Indian policy responds
[Guest]: to that crisis. And initially those are positive dynamics. And, you know, eventually because
[Guest]: of policy errors, things begin to go haywire and the Indian economy actually suffers more
[Guest]: than it would have if policy decisions were better. So, yeah, so that's how the book begins.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And you talk about sort of the first period after 2008, where the Indian policymakers
[Amit Varma]: led by Chidambaram and Montek Singhaluwalia are very precise about what they need to do.
[Amit Varma]: To quote from your book, quote, Chidambaram's instructions to the crisis managers at the
[Amit Varma]: RBI and the government were precise. He wanted measures that could ensure three objectives,
[Amit Varma]: enough liquidity in the market, no run on banks, and no bank collapses resulting from
[Amit Varma]: asset liability mismatch, stop quote. And the response of all the policymakers is again
[Amit Varma]: very considered, very precise, not looking at political considerations, just trying to
[Amit Varma]: handle the crisis and get India out of there. And, and they kind of succeed in doing that.
[Amit Varma]: And is this sort of, you know, in all the years that as an economic journalist, you've
[Amit Varma]: been covering government, is this an aberration? Or is this something that can sort of happen
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, outside of politics, economic decision makers continuously keep making the
[Amit Varma]: right decisions?
[Guest]: No, it's, it's an aberration. And it happens only when there's a crisis. What happens is
[Guest]: that, you know, in 2008, nobody wanted a repeat of 1991. And therefore, you know, just like
[Guest]: in 1991, they had given a free hand, finally, you know, after things go horribly wrong in
[Guest]: the IMF lays down conditions. Finally, in 1991, they gave a free hand to the economists.
[Guest]: Same thing happens in 2008, that, you know, because there's a crisis, and you're seeing
[Guest]: globally how severe the crisis is, you don't know how exposed you are to that. And you
[Guest]: don't know how much you're going to suffer because of that at that point in time. You're
[Guest]: so scared that you let the, you know, economists take the right decisions, because you don't
[Guest]: want a repeat of 1991. And I think that's what happened in 2008, the economists actually
[Guest]: got a free hand. And politicians let them do what was needed to be done, because nobody
[Guest]: wanted to repeat. Also, I think it helped at that point in time that the key people
[Guest]: involved, you know, like, if you're going to have Manmohan Singh as your prime minister,
[Guest]: he understands these things a lot more than a political prime minister would have. And
[Guest]: therefore he, you know, gave the economists a free hand. Same with Chidambaram. Chidambaram
[Guest]: had seen, you know, the aftermath of the 1991. Also, we must not forget, this is not there
[Guest]: in my book, but it can be seen in the book written by Dr. Reddy. His memoir is that,
[Guest]: you know, Dr. Reddy tries to caution P. Chidambaram in the run up to 2008, many times of, you
[Guest]: know, how the economy is overheating, and there's this international imbalances are
[Guest]: growing, and Chidambaram is not so receptive to it. I think that may have also been a thing
[Guest]: that you know, he may, it may have weighed on him that he had not listened to Reddy until
[Guest]: 2008 and Reddy was right, there is this crisis that breaks. And therefore, he's now a little
[Guest]: more careful and willing to listen to economists. I'm speculating over here, this might be also,
[Amit Varma]: you know, one factor.
[Amit Varma]: No, and in a sense, your book and what I like about your book is that it's not just a book
[Amit Varma]: of economics. It's also a lot of human drama in there. I mean, at the surface level, of
[Amit Varma]: course, it's about how politics impacts economics, but there's also a lot of human drama between
[Amit Varma]: all these different characters. And, you know, the internal dynamics that's going on, which
[Amit Varma]: was like, very fascinating to me, I thought, you know, you know, Shakespeare could pick
[Amit Varma]: up the book and find things in this, which would, you know, remind him of King Lear,
[Amit Varma]: for example.
[Guest]: Yeah, because, you know, as a journalist, you're kind of an insider, outsider, kind
[Guest]: of, you know, you're, you're often watching a whole lot of things. And you're seeing things
[Guest]: that, you know, people are doing and you're, you're seeing that they're driven by things
[Guest]: other than, you know, policy, somebody's pushing for something only because he's looking at
[Guest]: a career, you know, sinecure post retirement. So as a journalist, you're always watching
[Guest]: these, these things, and sometimes they become more important than other considerations when
[Amit Varma]: policy decisions have to be taken.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, the drama is pretty Shakespearean. I mean, you got King Lear, Macbeth, Comedy
[Amit Varma]: of Errors, all of that, you know, you've given an excellent account in your first chapter,
[Amit Varma]: the shock of how our policymakers responded to that. But for me, where the book really
[Amit Varma]: gets fascinating is from the combination of the two seminal events which change everything
[Amit Varma]: and which are not events you would expect to disrupt an economy to the scale that it
[Amit Varma]: did. And the first of those, interestingly, is the 2008 terrorist attacks. What happened?
[Guest]: Yes, so, so I think that sort of determined the course of the decade, a lot more than
[Guest]: anything else to do with politics or economics or, you know, conscious decision making. Then
[Guest]: the terror attack happened. Home Minister in charge had to resign. So, you know, there
[Guest]: was a whole controversy, if you recall about, you know, how many times he was changing his
[Guest]: outfit and all that. And there was a lot of noise by the opposition and he, he resigned.
[Guest]: Now when he resigned, Peter Dumbrum is brought in as the Home Minister, and this is barely
[Guest]: I think a month and a half after the global financial crisis breaks. And so Peter Dumbrum
[Guest]: gives up on finance ministry. So there's a vacancy in the finance ministry. Now, so what
[Guest]: Manmohan Singh decides is that he's going to, you know, take the additional charge for
[Guest]: the finance ministry and everybody in the finance ministry and everybody in the economy
[Guest]: as a whole, you know, industrialists and all, they're all very excited because here's the
[Guest]: person you know, who was the most important character in the 1991 reforms, and he's now
[Guest]: the finance minister apart from being the Prime Minister. And, you know, so we are going
[Guest]: to resume the 1991 reforms kind of thing. But that turns out to be a very temporary
[Guest]: thing because in January, unexpectedly, he has to go in for a coronary bypass. And Chidambaram
[Guest]: tells me as I write in the book that nobody knew about this. Chidambaram heard of this,
[Guest]: you know, when Dr. Singh was being, you know, taken to AIMS and was on the way, that's when
[Guest]: the Home Minister finds out about it. So it's very, something very unexpected. Now, when
[Guest]: the Prime Minister becomes indisposed for something like this, there is a lot of, you
[Guest]: know, standard procedures that sort of have to be followed. And part of that is that you
[Guest]: need a new finance minister. Now, in Lutyens Delhi, the feeling amongst everybody is that,
[Guest]: you know, the additional charge will pass on from Manmohan Singh to Peter Chidambaram
[Guest]: because even as Home Minister, he was assisting a little bit. He was assisting Manmohan Singh,
[Guest]: you know, in his finance ministry duties. Mainly, you know, every minister has to respond
[Guest]: to questions in Parliament and ministers, we don't, you know, average people don't take
[Guest]: that that seriously. But for the minister, that's very important. Every minister takes
[Guest]: his parliamentary questions very, very seriously. It's the most important thing according to
[Guest]: them that they do. And for that, Peter Chidambaram was assisting the Prime Minister and officials
[Guest]: used to go to him in his Home Ministry office for briefing, etc. And the other thing was
[Guest]: that election was coming and was approaching and therefore an interim budget had to be
[Guest]: placed in Parliament and there were preparations on for the interim budget. And under instructions
[Guest]: from Manmohan Singh, the interim budget meetings of finance ministry officials were being taken
[Guest]: by Peter Chidambaram in his Home Ministry office. And therefore, you know, when secretaries
[Guest]: to Government of India are going to him and discussing with him what needs to be done
[Guest]: in the interim budget, the impression in Lutyens Delhi is that, you know, now that the Prime
[Guest]: Minister can no longer hold charge and he's going to be hospitalized, etc. in this post
[Guest]: and therefore, you know, the charge will pass on to Peter Chidambaram. And so, you know,
[Guest]: there's this meeting that I describe in the book, you know, where they've all had this
[Guest]: meeting with Peter Chidambaram in his Home Ministry office. And, you know, they're all
[Guest]: discussing on the way walking that, you know, how he's going to now be the only person in
[Guest]: history of India to hold Home Ministry and Finance Ministry charge, two portfolios that
[Guest]: give you disproportionate control in Government of India. And by the time they return to their
[Guest]: chamber and, you know, this particular official, the television is switched on and, you know,
[Guest]: he started to find that the press communique from the President House says that additional
[Guest]: charge for Finance Ministry has been given to Pranam Mukherjee. And nobody could have
[Guest]: guessed that. And, you know, Pranam Mukherjee is given additional charge, but the press
[Guest]: communique quite clearly says it is only for as long as Manmohan Singh is indisposed. But
[Guest]: once Manmohan Singh returns to office in March, which is just a little short of when elections
[Guest]: are announced, Pranam Mukherjee does not give up on the additional charge. He holds on to
[Guest]: that charge. Now, what is the politics behind it? I only speculate in my book. I don't know.
[Guest]: But nobody expects at that point in time for this government to get voted back to power.
[Guest]: And once the elections happen, this government is voted back to power. And interestingly,
[Guest]: you know, they retain Pranam Mukherjee as the Finance Minister. And P. Chidambaram tells
[Guest]: me, you know, and I put that in the book, that Manmohan Singh was very clear and very
[Guest]: clearly had told P. Chidambaram that he intended to hold the finance portfolio. He had plans
[Guest]: for the economy and for economic policy. And he intended to hold that portfolio. That portfolio
[Guest]: passes on to Pranam Mukherjee. And until 2012, you know, Pranam Mukherjee is the Finance
[Guest]: Minister. Now, this is an outcome of first, the Mumbai terror attacks. Secondly, the bypass
[Guest]: surgery that Manmohan Singh goes into. And, you know, some politics that goes on where
[Guest]: this portfolio goes to Pranam Mukherjee. But, you know, when we look at between the time,
[Guest]: the three and a half years, Pranam Mukherjee has been the Finance Minister, he takes so
[Guest]: many decisions that have such a, you know, overbearing, disproportional impact on the
[Guest]: economic policy and therefore the economy in this decade. And he's in that position
[Guest]: to make that influence, despite not the Prime Minister's first choice. So, you know, that's
[Guest]: what I mean when I say that things, you know, don't always go like, you know, how we plan
[Amit Varma]: and the rule of chance, etc. Yeah. And the interesting thing about Mukherjee
[Amit Varma]: is that even though he's completely on top of politics, you know, he's known as a Mooran
[Amit Varma]: shaker and someone who's can, you know, negotiate with all the parties and get things done.
[Amit Varma]: When it comes to economics, it's completely the other way around. As you point out, he'd
[Amit Varma]: held the finance portfolio 24 years earlier. If I remember correctly, when Indira Gandhi
[Amit Varma]: was assassinated, he was Finance Minister. And you quote a secretary in his department
[Amit Varma]: saying, quote, he was in the first few months a bit lost. The world had changed. He had
[Amit Varma]: not changed. Stop quote. And you elaborate on this when you say, and now I'll quote you,
[Amit Varma]: finance and economics has changed. Since then, the economy had been liberalized, it had changed
[Amit Varma]: structurally and fundamentally, the work culture and mindsets in the ministry had changed to
[Amit Varma]: Mukherjee, though still seem to swear by the socialist era ideology that had long been
[Amit Varma]: retired. His approach and instinct was still defined by an abiding faith in the jaded judicious
[Amit Varma]: doctrine. The new finance minister was not as conversant with the new economic order
[Amit Varma]: as his post liberalization predecessors were. Mukherjee soon earned a reputation for being
[Amit Varma]: old school and being out of tune with global economic affairs, stop quote. And what kind
[Amit Varma]: of adds to this, which is very intriguing, because this is again, you know, a dynamic
[Amit Varma]: that has obviously come about because of politics is that he is disinclined to listen to anything
[Amit Varma]: his Prime Minister, Manmohan says, you know, and part of this might well be because when
[Amit Varma]: he was finance minister under Indira Gandhi, he had appointed Manmohan as a governor of
[Amit Varma]: the RBI. So now the tables are almost kind of reversed. But part of it is surely because
[Amit Varma]: of this increasing sort of ambiguity about who is really in charge here. Is it Manmohan
[Guest]: Singh or is it Sonia Gandhi? So, yeah, the second chapter is actually about all of this.
[Guest]: And I do say in this chapter that, you know, Pranam Mukherjee represents everything ideologically
[Guest]: and otherwise that Manmohan Singh had taken apart in 1991 through his reforms. Manmohan
[Guest]: Singh represents what happened in 1991. But, you know, Pranam Mukherjee represents what
[Guest]: it was that Manmohan Singh had taken apart. And Pranam Mukherjee is not able to update
[Guest]: his ways to post 1991. And therefore, when once he's back in the finance ministry, what
[Guest]: he does, he tries to recreate a pre 1991, you know, economic policy regime. And this
[Guest]: is not just me saying this, you know, Pranam Mukherjee in his memoirs a couple of times
[Guest]: says that his and Manmohan Singh's ideologies were poles apart. They could never agree on
[Guest]: their economic ideology. And Peter Dumbrin also tells me the same thing. And except that,
[Guest]: you know, they are both very graceful in the way they negotiate their differences, Manmohan
[Guest]: Singh and Pranam Mukherjee. And this, you know, I hear from everybody in the bureaucracy
[Guest]: and cabinet colleagues of the two of them where they say that, yes, they both ideologically
[Guest]: disagree completely, but they don't disrespect each other. There is a point by when their
[Guest]: differences are so deep and so non-negotiable. And I think I wouldn't say this is because
[Guest]: of Sonia Gandhi. What I bring out in the book, I think it is because of Manmohan Singh's
[Guest]: personality. It never comes to a point where Manmohan Singh tells Pranam Mukherjee, listen,
[Guest]: you disagree with what I think should be done, but I still want you to do this. I'm your
[Guest]: prime minister. He'd never says that. And I really wish he could have done something
[Guest]: like that because after all, he's a prime minister. I think it is his personality, you
[Guest]: know, where he sort of doesn't do that. Such as, you know, one of the examples I give is
[Guest]: infamous Vodafone retrospective taxation provision where the government of India loses the case
[Guest]: in the Supreme Court and yet Pranam Mukherjee brings in, you know, a legal provision overturning
[Guest]: that and, you know, slaps this tax bill on to Vodafone capital gains. Before he took
[Guest]: that decision, he discusses this, you know, in the core committee of the Congress where
[Guest]: there's the prime minister and a whole lot of other ministers, each one of them. And
[Guest]: he himself writes this in his book, in his memoir, that even Sonia Gandhi told him not
[Guest]: to do it. Manmohan Singh explained to him why it was not the right thing to do, but
[Guest]: he still went ahead, you know, not listening to them. He still went ahead and he did it.
[Guest]: And I think that's the thing. Pranam Mukherjee was just this personality in the UPA2 government
[Guest]: who would just do what he wanted to do. Most of what he wanted to do was, you know, how
[Guest]: decisions were taken in pre-liberalization India, because that's, you know, those were
[Guest]: his formative years. He was refusing to tune himself to the post 1991 economy. And at no
[Guest]: point does the prime minister tell him that, you know, I'm advising you to do what I'm
[Guest]: saying. So he kind of, you know, has this free hand and I describe in the book that
[Guest]: it does reach a point where there's no communication between the two of them. And finance minister's
[Guest]: office and the prime minister's office communicate with each other only through messengers. There's
[Guest]: an example also I give there of a particular decision that has to be taken and how, you
[Guest]: know, they go about, the prime minister goes about, you know, getting Pranam Mukherjee
[Guest]: to finally, you know, sign on the file. But so, so, you know, your prime minister and
[Guest]: your finance minister is not even talking to each other at a time when the economy sort
[Guest]: of recovering from a very severe shock. The finance minister's ideologically driven to
[Guest]: do everything that he should not be doing, you know, he's doing everything opposite of
[Guest]: what is required in the economy. Can you imagine, you know, the kind of policy chaos that goes
[Guest]: on in such a government and the price we are paying of it even today.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll quote from your book again about the impact of his years. At one point, you write,
[Amit Varma]: within 24 months of Mukherjee's entry into the finance ministry, the GDP growth rate
[Amit Varma]: crashed from 8.9% in 2010-11 to 5.5% in 2012-13. And elsewhere, you write, before Mukherjee's
[Amit Varma]: appointment as finance minister, India was on the verge of being christened a miracle
[Amit Varma]: economy. By the time Mukherjee exited, large fiscal deficits and a high net international
[Amit Varma]: debt position had made the country vulnerable to global financial shocks and terms of trade
[Amit Varma]: shocks. Stop quote. You know, sum up for me, what are the different things he did, which
[Amit Varma]: obviously Manmohan and Chidambaram would have done differently? What are the kind of policy
[Amit Varma]: decisions which went into play, which made all of this happen?
[Guest]: So, broadly along two lines, one was his whole approach to tax policy and, you know, sectoral
[Guest]: policies that dampened the investment mood, the investor's mood. If you recall, the whole
[Guest]: Vodafone thing was a huge embarrassment for India as an economy in the global investor
[Guest]: community. India was, you know, not seen as a good investment destination after that.
[Guest]: Secondly, you know, there were a lot of reforms that as finance minister, he was in charge
[Guest]: of that he just did not push through. Most important of which is the GST. Here is a politician
[Guest]: known to create consensus and build bridges with the opposition and push legislation through.
[Guest]: If you recall, you know, he was a troubleshooter, so-called, of the government. And for one
[Guest]: legislation, you know, the constitution amendment to introduce the GST, that falls in the purview
[Guest]: of his own ministry. For nearly three years, the standing committee on finance headed by
[Guest]: Yashwant Sinha did not even prepare its report. So, you know, that's a procedural step. Unless
[Guest]: the standing committee gives its report, you cannot proceed with what you need to do to,
[Guest]: you know, move the constitution amendment bill to introduce GST. How did he not, you
[Guest]: know, persuade Yashwant Sinha to speed up the process of giving his committee report?
[Guest]: So, you know, those are the steps in terms of the reform steps that needed to be taken.
[Guest]: There are many other such examples that I give in the book.
[Amit Varma]: You point out how Dr. Arvind Virmani had actually given a whole list of reforms which needed
[Amit Varma]: to be carried out, which Manmohan and Chidambaram were on board with, but Mukherjee just completely
[Amit Varma]: ghosted him as, you know, millennials would say. And, you know, Dr. Virmani was telling
[Guest]: me, which I, you know, I quote him in the book is that, you know, he was earlier the
[Guest]: chief economic advisor and then he's appointed as India's representative at the IMF in Washington.
[Guest]: And so once a year, every year, he used to come down to India and, you know, as part
[Guest]: of protocol, he used to meet the finance minister and, you know, the chief economic advisor
[Guest]: and all that. And in his meetings with the finance minister, Pranam Mukherjee, he tries
[Guest]: to tell the finance minister that these are reforms that you need to do. And, you know,
[Guest]: this is what you need to do with your fiscal policy. And because you're not doing your
[Guest]: fiscal policy the way it needs to be, it is impacting the monetary policy. And, you know,
[Guest]: the fiscal policy, monetary policy combination is just going haywire. So, Pranam Mukherjee
[Guest]: tells him that, listen, you know, right now, let this be, but when you come, you know,
[Guest]: just before the next budget, you come back and you tell me and in the coming budget,
[Guest]: I, you know, we will do this, we will do what you're saying. So, Arvind Mani plans a special
[Guest]: trip to India from Washington to come and meet Pranam Mukherjee in Delhi before budget
[Guest]: preparations start in North Block to brief him on what needs to be done. And when he
[Guest]: comes back in this particular trip to explain to him and, you know, to brief him on what
[Guest]: needs to be done on economic policy and fiscal policy, et cetera, reforms. But he failed
[Guest]: to get an appointment, you know, from the finance minister's office. And he is forced
[Guest]: to return to Washington. You know, the trip is wasted because the finance minister's office
[Guest]: does not give him an appointment to meet Pranam Mukherjee. And all these reforms that he has
[Guest]: recommended don't take place. GST does not make much progress because the standing committee
[Guest]: is sitting on its report. It's headed by Ashwant Sinha. And on top of that, all these decisions
[Guest]: are getting taken, you know, where you're after a private sector company, a Vodafone,
[Guest]: you know, wins a case against you in the Supreme Court and you bring, you know, legislative
[Guest]: changes to, you know, sort of force them to do what you want to do. And that's completely
[Guest]: destroying India's reputation internationally as an investment destination. And you're also
[Guest]: following this policy of, you know, just sort of injecting so much money into the economy.
[Guest]: Again, going completely against the advice you have received from the economists in the
[Guest]: government, you're not rolling the part of the response measures that were designed by
[Guest]: the economists, you know, because of which Indian economy did not completely collapse
[Guest]: after the global financial crisis. Part of that was this whole fiscal stimulus spending
[Guest]: that needed to be done. Now, it is very clear in their heads and in their proposals that
[Guest]: this was all very temporary measures. You cannot give this stimulus year after year,
[Guest]: you know, unendingly. But Pranab Mukherjee refuses to, you know, roll back that stimulus.
[Guest]: It just goes on and on and on. And the fiscal deficit keeps climbing. It reaches a point
[Guest]: where, you know, the fiscal deficit is 6% for the central government. And, you know,
[Guest]: that has implications in the real economy, that has implications for monetary policy.
[Guest]: And I also described how the RBI governor comes to Delhi for meetings before his monetary
[Guest]: policy announcements to meet the finance minister. And in these meetings, the finance minister
[Guest]: never says anything, but his whole team of officials, you know, keep forcing the RBI
[Guest]: governor to, you know, make changes in the monetary policy, saying that there's nothing
[Guest]: we can do from here, you know, in North Block about fiscal policy and whatever that needs
[Guest]: to be done to help the economy has to be done by the RBI. And the entire burden of controlling
[Guest]: inflation, which is, you know, by that time, when Pranab Mukherjee was in office at one
[Guest]: point, you know, inflation reaches 20%. And Pranab Mukherjee and his team of officials
[Guest]: in North Block are not willing to do anything about it. And they just keep telling the RBI
[Guest]: governor that, you know, whatever has to be done has to be done by you. It has to be done
[Guest]: by the RBI. So, economic policy making coordination with RBI is not in a very good shape, you
[Guest]: know, during Pranab Mukherjee's tenure. It's really, I mean, as finance minister, it's
[Guest]: really difficult to look for what it is, you know, that goes right in the finance ministry
[Guest]: in this period.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, speaking of his, you know, clashes with the RBI, there's a great quote by him,
[Amit Varma]: you know, an official who knew Mukherjee has quoted him as saying, which you reproduced
[Amit Varma]: in your book, where Mukherjee says, quote, I can't do anything on the fiscal side because
[Amit Varma]: of political compulsions. The RBI must therefore take full responsibility for reviving growth.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote. And for a moment, you know, let's take a sidetrack here. And one of the sort
[Amit Varma]: of themes that runs through your book and the policymaking is, firstly, the role of
[Amit Varma]: the RBI, its tenuous relationship with different governments, and also the fundamental issue
[Amit Varma]: of inflation, where Mukherjee, of course, assumed that, you know, inflation could simply
[Amit Varma]: be managed by the RBI with monetary policy, which, of course, is not the case. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, there were constant tensions that often comes up is with lowering interest rates,
[Amit Varma]: whereas you point out, politicians will always want the RBI to lower interest rates because
[Amit Varma]: their interest groups are happy, you have more money going into the economy, and all
[Amit Varma]: the big corporate houses that funds them are getting cheaper money, and that's what they
[Amit Varma]: want. So their imperatives are in that direction. But the more you lower interest rates, the
[Amit Varma]: more you raise the chance of inflation, because you have more money chasing fewer goods. And
[Amit Varma]: therefore, the RBI is always sort of pushing back against them. And this is a constant
[Amit Varma]: tussle over the years. So, you know, through through this period, in fact, the entire 10
[Amit Varma]: years for that matter, can you just kind of sum up what were the sort of stresses between
[Amit Varma]: the RBI and the governments of the time?
[Guest]: Yeah, so the stress between the RBI and the government can be seen throughout this 10
[Guest]: year period, it is of one nature in the time of the UPA, because they're the main fight
[Guest]: for the RBI is against inflation. And it becomes a little different in the post 2014 period,
[Guest]: where the government's change, because they're the nature of the problem that the RBI is
[Guest]: attacking changes, inflation comes under control. And if you see that it comes under control,
[Guest]: because Urjit Patel and Raghuram Rajan starting 2013, take a very strict stance against inflation,
[Guest]: and they get for minimum for a small window of 18 months, when Peter Dumpram comes back
[Guest]: as the finance minister, they get support from him, because I guess, Peter Dumpram and
[Guest]: you know, Manmohan Singh are in tune with the RBI a little more than the other political
[Guest]: leaders who become finance ministers. And they, you know, they start to take steps and
[Guest]: of course, Narendra Modi government's record on inflation is a lot better. And it has helped
[Guest]: a great deal by international oil prices. So RBI is no longer fighting inflation, you
[Guest]: know, post 2014, they need to support growth. Either way, the tussle between the RBI and
[Guest]: the government comes, because for some reason, finance ministers and politicians in India
[Guest]: have just assumed that the only way to reduce inflation is interest rate policy. The only
[Guest]: way to support growth is interest rate policy. And fiscal policy can be whatever, you know,
[Guest]: their political compulsions dictated to be. Either they have assumed this or that, you
[Guest]: know, they pretend this is what they know. But, you know, in India, the interest rate
[Guest]: policy cannot only be determined by the needs of the industrialists for capital, because
[Guest]: Indians are savers. We have a huge section of our society that depends on its savings
[Guest]: for, you know, retirement growth. And we, you know, they are a dispersed group. They
[Guest]: are, they are not as vocal as corporate lobbies and industrial lobbies are. They would like
[Guest]: interest rates to be high. Corporate lobbies would like interest rates to be low. Corporate
[Guest]: lobbies are very organized in getting themselves heard by finance ministers. And, you know,
[Guest]: the RBI, in the end, becomes the only institution that is sensitive to the needs of the savers
[Guest]: in the economy. And also inflation, which is a tax on poor people. I quote Y. V. Reddy
[Guest]: in the book, I quote from his book, where he says that, you know, the political consensus
[Guest]: in India, you know, until about 2005, seemed to be that the level of inflation after which,
[Guest]: you know, politicians begin to get sensitive until that was as high as 10%, you know, whereas,
[Guest]: and he also explains that, you know, when inflation is high, what we don't realize is
[Guest]: that the shock of that on poor people can set them back in ways where, you know, slowly,
[Guest]: even if you bring inflation under control, they may not return, you know, back to that
[Guest]: normal position from where they had started losing because the poor have very low ability
[Guest]: to take, to absorb shocks to their incomes, which is not the case, you know, for people
[Guest]: who are not poor. And therefore, the RBI must always be more sensitive, you know, to inflation
[Guest]: type concerns. And it's very strange that politicians, according to him, do not display
[Guest]: this sensitivity of the poor and their incomes to inflation shocks. Of course, in the UPA
[Guest]: 2 tenure, there are some factors of inflation that are beyond their control, which is oil
[Guest]: prices, but during the tenure of Pranab Mukherjee, a lot of that inflation is because of his
[Guest]: fiscal policies. And he just refuses to listen to the RBI governor on that. And, in fact,
[Guest]: the RBI governor D. Subba Rao, I quote from his book, and I also quote him in his conversations
[Guest]: with me for this book, where he says that, you know, he goes and meets routinely, he
[Guest]: meets the Prime Minister and the Prime Minister, you know, keeps bringing up this point. And
[Guest]: he explains to the Prime Minister why inflation is high, why what needs to be done, you know,
[Guest]: fiscal deficit needs to be reduced. And the Prime Minister Mnangon Singh is always in
[Guest]: agreement with him. But, you know, he doesn't say anything to the finance minister. And,
[Guest]: you know, he makes it known that this is between the governor and the finance minister, and
[Guest]: he's kind of not going to, you know, throw his weight one way or the other. And, you
[Guest]: know, again, this is, I think, you know, I would call it a leadership failure of, you
[Guest]: know, Mnangon Singh bhai. This is not a thing of turf, you know, if inflation is biting
[Guest]: the people, the Prime Minister should tell the finance minister that, you know, the RBI
[Guest]: is saying this, and I'm an economist, I understand this, that a lot of it is because of your
[Guest]: fiscal policy, you need to tighten, you know, your purse strings. That doesn't seem to happen.
[Guest]: Even if it happens, so far, we don't have evidence of it. You know, let's not say it
[Guest]: doesn't happen. There is no evidence is yet available that, you know, Mnangon Singh had
[Guest]: these conversations with Pranam Mukherjee.
[Unknown]: Hello, hello, hello, everybody. Welcome to another awesome week on the IBM Podcast Network.
[Unknown]: If you are not following us on social media, please make sure you do. We're IBM Podcast
[Unknown]: on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram. You know, the IPL has been going full bore this week
[Unknown]: or for the last couple of weeks. If you podcast around that, we got a couple of suggestions
[Unknown]: for you. There is a new show that we've launched called What A Player. It's being hosted by
[Unknown]: Akash Mehta, the host of Arta Lab, and Siddharth Duteja, who is a really funny standup comic.
[Unknown]: Also on Cyrus says we've been doing this Wednesday episode called Lanso, left arm not so orthodox.
[Unknown]: On that Cyrus is talking to a variety of different people about what happened the previous week
[Unknown]: in cricket. And if you want to get a historical perspective on what T20 cricket is and how
[Unknown]: it's come about, you might want to check out the show we did a couple of years ago called
[Unknown]: The Cricketwala Chronicles. It's hosted by Ayaz Mehmet and in the first season Ayaz examines
[Unknown]: how T20 cricket started. And speaking of the action this week, it's an abundance of Cyrus's
[Unknown]: this week on Cyrus says Cyrus Brocha is joined by Cyrus Hoshidhar, Adman and former creative
[Unknown]: director of MTV India. Both of them talk about the heyday of Indian music television and
[Unknown]: why it was a success. On Advertising is Dead, Varun is joined by his ex-boss, Saurabh Kanwar,
[Unknown]: co-founder of ATKT. They talk about what ATKT does and how it's helping the community of
[Unknown]: college students, why the current generation is more equipped than the last and more. On
[Unknown]: The Sponge Podcast, Ambipanmeshwaran talks about why it is crucial to say no to incompatible
[Unknown]: clients. On this week's episode of the Vishal Goondal Show, Vishal is in a conversation
[Unknown]: with Niyati Shah, who talks about the importance of sexual health, parenting and spreading
[Unknown]: awareness about the subject. On our Kannada Podcast, Thalle Harate, Pavan Srinath and
[Unknown]: Ganesh Chakravarti talk about voting and predict election results with Kartik Shashidhar. On
[Unknown]: Dating is Garbage, the co-founder of Books on Toast, Anuya Jakaddar talks about how the
[Unknown]: patriarchal system surrounds the institution of marriage. And with that, let's get you
[Unknown]: on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: So to go back to the political morality played as unfolding during Pranam Mukherjee's tenure,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you point out how number one, he's not carrying out any of the reforms that are
[Amit Varma]: desperately required, especially the structural reforms that will, you know, boost manufacturing
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. Secondly, you point out about his, you know, how fiscally he's gone haywire.
[Amit Varma]: There's a lot more money being pumped into the economy and social sector spending goes
[Amit Varma]: up enormously because of political imperatives. The third thing, which I'd like you to quickly
[Amit Varma]: sort of mention that you talk about at length in your book is the policy paralysis that
[Amit Varma]: comes about because of the 2G scam.
[Guest]: Yes. So there, I think it's got a lot more to do with the role of the CAG, the role of
[Guest]: the opposition and the role of the media. Also, you know, how things played out in courts,
[Guest]: where this scam scares decision makers and government so much that they stop approving
[Guest]: files and files stop moving. Now, remember, this comes at a point when, because there
[Guest]: was a boom in the economy and Indian corporate sector and industrialists were hopeful that,
[Guest]: you know, that trajectory will continue. It is because of betting on that trajectory,
[Guest]: they have taken a lot of loans and started a lot of projects and they may have gone overboard
[Guest]: as Raghuram Rajan says, there was an over exuberance. They've taken more loans than
[Guest]: they ideally should have. And, but the global financial crisis, an unexpected event takes
[Guest]: place. And those, you know, investment decisions need to be reassessed in light of, you know,
[Guest]: the changed economic scenario, but because the economy is handled well, you know, the
[Guest]: growth does not collapse. Instead of recalibrating their investment decisions and exuberance,
[Guest]: what the corporate sector does is it extends itself even further. And then when because
[Guest]: of Ranam Mukherjee's policies and other economic shocks, such as inflation, you know, the economy
[Guest]: doesn't do as well. And this 2G scam happens, the projects get delayed or stuck. The investment
[Guest]: calculations of companies go haywire instead of, you know, saying that I'm not going to
[Guest]: do as much as I thought I'll recalibrate. What they do is they, they ask for more loans,
[Guest]: you know, they further extend themselves and banks very willingly extend even more roles.
[Guest]: And there again, I described how the seeds of this NPA crisis is actually sown at the
[Guest]: time of when Ranam Mukherjee is in the finance ministry and there's a complete failure of
[Guest]: oversight, you know, and so companies take further loans and no policies are being taken
[Guest]: because of which the economy just doesn't recover and projects keep getting stuck. Bureaucrats
[Guest]: don't take decisions. And there is a complete paralysis in the economy where approvals are
[Guest]: not taking place, more and more loans are being taken so that projects don't die. And
[Guest]: there's an incentive. I described how, you know, the banks are also, they think it is
[Guest]: in their interest to ever green these loans instead of cut their losses and, you know,
[Guest]: write off and say that, you know, this project is not viable anymore. Let me, you know, just
[Guest]: sort of put that in my books. They also don't do that. So that's how there's a policy
[Guest]: paralysis that gets converted into a big NPA crisis. And eventually that NPA crisis comes
[Guest]: back in the tenure of Narendra Modi government, it becomes a complete banking paralysis where
[Guest]: then there is, you know, credit flow in the economy completely gets choked and there's
[Guest]: no money, banks have no money, you know, to extend credit because in between, you know,
[Guest]: comes this new RBI governor who forces everybody to become, you know, more honest about what
[Guest]: is the kind of NPA sitting on their bank books, they can't hide it anymore. And, you know,
[Guest]: that's a huge part of the economy, where things are not going right in this decade.
[Amit Varma]: And I have a sort of a broader philosophical question here, which is that, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: policy paralysis as you've as you've laid out got exacerbated and, you know, led to
[Amit Varma]: NPAs becoming worse because people were scared to take action and even outside of that domain
[Amit Varma]: bureaucrats were afraid to do anything that could lead them later to be accused of corruption.
[Amit Varma]: So my broad question here is that there is, you know, everyone would agree that government
[Amit Varma]: needs to be transparent, and they need to be there needs to be scrutiny of all decisions
[Amit Varma]: that are made. So there seems here to be some kind of trade off between scrutiny and paralysis
[Amit Varma]: that on the other hand, you need a certain amount of scrutiny to keep government honest.
[Amit Varma]: But on the flip side of that, as we saw in this case is that if officials become terrified
[Amit Varma]: of doing anything at all, you know, like in the 2g case, for example, like you've eloquently
[Amit Varma]: described in your book, and I'll ask my listeners to check that out, is that what the government
[Amit Varma]: claimed was that they were, you know, looking at a trade off between revenue optimization
[Amit Varma]: and welfare optimization, and they went on the side of welfare and therefore, but then
[Amit Varma]: later that was thrown back in their face, as if the revenue foregone was a was an example
[Amit Varma]: of corruption and leaving aside the merits of that particular case, how does one resolve
[Amit Varma]: this trade off in this conflict between scrutiny and paralysis?
[Guest]: I think this is a leadership failure, political leadership, I discussed this point with Peter
[Guest]: Dumbrin in the book, and he agrees and I mean, you know, so so what I'm trying to say is
[Guest]: that there is probably this is how even the government of the day felt that this is completely
[Guest]: a political leadership, you see, why did the 2g scam become such a thing of scare the the
[Guest]: overzealous investigative agencies, why did they become such a scare for all bureaucrats
[Guest]: across the board, because let's not forget, the first instinct of a bureaucrat is self
[Guest]: preservation, what they were seeing is that what should have been a policy decision had
[Guest]: been presented as a scam. And cam theory had got so much purchase in the media and in the
[Guest]: political setup that you know, the courts found it difficult to not not take it up.
[Guest]: And the whole thing became such a huge controversy. I don't think you know, any bureaucrat would
[Guest]: have reacted in any different way. I mean, why should I take a decision and tomorrow
[Guest]: be questioned about it, rather than not take a decision and you know, retire safely. So
[Guest]: I think bureaucrats were acting very, very rationally. And what was happening is that
[Guest]: the whole thing really got very politicized, very controversial. And this trade off how
[Guest]: to prevent this, I think, you know, there has to be a balance of information. Why did
[Guest]: this happen? There was asymmetry of information, the media was playing it up, the you know,
[Guest]: opposition in parliament was playing it up, the government was keeping quiet. And there's
[Guest]: a long description from an interview that Salman Khurshid has given, you know, to the
[Guest]: Hindu newspaper, where he describes how there was absolute lack of clarity within the government
[Guest]: on how to handle this political. This was a political crisis. This was not an administration
[Guest]: crisis. It was not an economic crisis. This particular case, it was a completely political
[Guest]: crisis. And because of the duality of authority in the UPA between Sonia Gandhi and Manmohan
[Guest]: Singh, the cabinet just didn't know how to handle this. And Salman Khurshid says, this
[Guest]: is the first time, you know, in the Congress that this has happened always, their political
[Guest]: party leadership and Prime Minister were always one individual. So they didn't know how to
[Guest]: go about this. They were not able to counter, you know, things that were being said, and
[Amit Varma]: it just got out of hand.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, as always happens when I am three quarters of the way through an episode
[Amit Varma]: as often happens is that I realized that a book is so good that I can't possibly do justice
[Amit Varma]: to all of it during the episode. So out of your four chapters, I'm going to quickly summarize
[Amit Varma]: what your third chapter is about. And I encourage listeners to read that for themselves, because
[Amit Varma]: I'd rather go to the fourth very fascinating chapter of the Modi years. But the third chapter
[Amit Varma]: basically is about how just as serendipity took us backwards by giving us Pranam Mukherjee
[Amit Varma]: as a finance minister, it also then helped us out where, you know, one of his possible
[Amit Varma]: lifelong ambitions of becoming president since the prime ministership seemed out of reach
[Amit Varma]: was finally fulfilled. And because he could become president, Chidambaram could, you know,
[Amit Varma]: with 18 months left to go for the elections, become finance minister again, and start taking
[Amit Varma]: some really hard decisions for the economy. And I'll just quote his own words from it,
[Amit Varma]: as you've quoted in your book about what happened. Quote, fiscal deficit was sharply reduced.
[Amit Varma]: The current account deficit, in fact, had been contained substantially by squeezing.
[Amit Varma]: Some very harsh decisions were taken, which of course affected growth. And it did not
[Amit Varma]: give us the kind of advantage that we should have got if inflation had been lower. Ultimately,
[Amit Varma]: we lost the 2014 Lok Sabha elections partly on apart from the corruption charges, we lost
[Amit Varma]: our inflation, stop quote. And this is again very interesting where you have an economist
[Amit Varma]: who really gets it. And he gets that this is almost like a crisis brewing and something
[Amit Varma]: needs to be done. And he takes decisions, which essentially harms him and his party
[Amit Varma]: politically.
[Guest]: Yes, I do see that, you know, in what he says that, you know, these are these trade offs
[Guest]: that have to be made. And, you know, he makes those trade offs as the person in charge.
[Guest]: I do argue in this third chapter that, you know, the sort of political landscape was
[Guest]: made fertile because of this high inflation and, you know, really mismanagement of the
[Guest]: economy by the UPA government. And there are various other things discussed, like, you
[Guest]: know, why the food inflation was so high and Sharad Pawar's role comes in there. And because
[Guest]: of the corruption charges, it is because of this economic discontent. This is my theory.
[Guest]: And it is for political analysts and experts to examine if I may be right or wrong. This
[Guest]: is what I sort of speculate, you know, whether because the economic discontent made the political
[Guest]: landscape fertile, there are a lot of promises that were made by Narendra Modi in his campaign
[Guest]: starting September 2013, that sort of got the kind of purchase from voters that it did.
[Guest]: So the land for that was made, political landscape for that was made fertile by the economic
[Guest]: mismanagement by the UPA too, ironically headed by a distinguished economist. And the start
[Guest]: of the Modi wave is actually because of the complete economic mismanagement by the UPA
[Amit Varma]: too.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So, you know, so Modi comes to power in 2014. Tell me a little bit about what is
[Amit Varma]: Modi's approach to governance and economics, because it seems to start off well where he
[Amit Varma]: makes as he did during campaigning, he makes all the right noises. He has no shortage of
[Amit Varma]: good advisors. You know, Ela Patnaik is part of the setup and, you know, the Niti Aayog
[Amit Varma]: is set up with Panagaria and so on. But what is Modi's own approach to economics and the
[Guest]: problems that India faces then?
[Guest]: Oh, actually, good question. In the last chapter, you know, I asked this exact same question
[Guest]: of Mr. Arun Jaitley. And I quote his answers to me, you know, on Mr. Modi's whole approach
[Guest]: to economic policy. And what those answers tell me is that Mr. Modi is more politically
[Guest]: inclined. And, you know, whatever he does, whatever decisions he takes, it is on the
[Guest]: basis of the political gains that can be expected from those. And I think a lot of it depends
[Guest]: on who it is who's briefing him about what needs to be done and what the problem is.
[Guest]: So when he starts in 2014, I described this whole, you know, meeting that he does with
[Guest]: all the secretaries to government and how he makes all the right noises. All the bureaucrats
[Guest]: in Lutyens Delhi, you know, 80 secretaries to government defender, how excited and thrilled
[Guest]: they are that the phase of policy paralysis has ended. And finally, they're going to be,
[Guest]: you know, headed by a decisive Prime Minister and they're going to be taking decisions.
[Guest]: But as the months progress, it becomes clear that, you know, not only is Mr. Modi complete
[Guest]: polar opposite of Dr. Manmohan Singh, he's also, he's very close to the ground. And what
[Guest]: appeals to him is, you know, programs and schemes, Swachh Bharat, you know, there's
[Guest]: a whole long list of programs that bureaucrats design and he loves to go and inaugurate them.
[Guest]: And he has these solutions for things that he has seen as a chief minister go wrong.
[Guest]: But you know, I quote bureaucrats there where they begin to wonder very soon, is that really
[Guest]: the job at the center of a prime minister? We have some reason to believe that Mr. Modi
[Guest]: has a more chief minister like approach to his prime ministership, which has its plus
[Guest]: points and its negative points. Plus points because he's less ivory tower type, you know,
[Guest]: than prime ministers can be. But negative points because really the job of the center's
[Guest]: policymaking, you know, correcting for policy errors, and programs and schemes cannot substitute
[Guest]: for policymaking. And so, Mr. Modi's heard that economic reforms need to be done. He's
[Guest]: built a campaign on the jobs crisis in 2014, he promises jobs. And he's obviously been
[Guest]: briefed by his economic advisors that land reforms, labor reforms, GST, make in India
[Guest]: the way to go forward and fix all the problems of the economy. And, you know, he's doing
[Guest]: that. He does that in 2014 and 15. But the minute he faces his first political crisis,
[Guest]: he loses faith in all of that. In 2014, not only did he win the 2014 Lok Sabha election,
[Guest]: there are a lot of state elections, assembly elections that the BJP wins quite handsomely.
[Guest]: But starting 2015, in February, they get a root shock in Delhi. And through 2015, that's
[Guest]: really a turning point for the Modi government, the year 2015. Through 2015, they face a lot
[Guest]: of political crisis in Parliament, when the Congress raises the slogan of Sood Boot Ki
[Guest]: Sarkar, and they oppose the land reforms. And you know, the land amendment legislation
[Guest]: that the Modi government has brought in Parliament, and they have promulgated an ordinance and
[Guest]: it has been re-promulgated multiple times, they finally are forced to allow it to lapse.
[Guest]: Because by November, there are no other state assembly elections through 2015. But in November,
[Guest]: there is the Bihar election where again, they had a root shock. And I think in 2015, internally,
[Guest]: they really begin to ask themselves, has the Modi wave ended? Has it ended? And like I
[Guest]: said, it happened at the time of the Vajpayee government losing election. The way the politician
[Guest]: thinks that reforms do not get me elected. And therefore, let me now do something that
[Guest]: will get me elected. And therefore, what the BJP decides to do is they need to reinvent
[Guest]: Mr. Modi's image as somebody who's pro-poor. They need a scheme which they think will match
[Guest]: up to what the NREGA was for which they believe that, you know, UPA2 was voted back to power
[Guest]: because of NREGA. And they have to, the other thing is that, you know, a big part of their
[Guest]: campaign was the black money issue, the corruption issue, where Arvind Kejriwal's win in Delhi
[Guest]: shows them that, you know, he may now just walk away with the mantle of, you know, corruption
[Guest]: and black money and they need to do something. They've taken many steps. There have been
[Guest]: lots of things that they have done for black money, but nothing is, you know, everything
[Guest]: has produced very moderate results. There's nothing they can go to the voters with and
[Guest]: say, see, this is what we've done against corruption and black money. And therefore,
[Guest]: you know, there is a kind of a rethinking that takes place in 2015 in the BJP. And it
[Guest]: takes them back to the drawing board and they come up with demonetization as the solution.
[Guest]: And not only do they come up with demonetization, they bury all plans for land reforms, for
[Guest]: labor reforms. Make in India takes a side seat. The Prime Minister stops talking about
[Guest]: Make in India at his public events. He talks now all the time about farmers, doubling farmer
[Guest]: incomes and things like that. So he kind of reorients, he reinvents his image, but he
[Guest]: also very successfully and he, you know, reorients his government policy away from reforms and
[Guest]: towards, you know, what he thinks will have purchase with voters. And yeah, so that's
[Guest]: the story really of how, you know, Mr. Modi sort of responds to economic policy.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I've had a number of episodes on demonetization, I'll link them from the episode
[Amit Varma]: page which cover all the economic aspects of it. But what I particularly found fascinating
[Amit Varma]: in your book was the political narrative behind it, which, again, underscores how to Modi
[Amit Varma]: governance doesn't matter at all, only optics does. So it's not that he wants to solve the
[Amit Varma]: problem of black money or even understand why that problem exists. He just wants to
[Amit Varma]: be seen to be solving it. It's not that he actually wants to be pro poor. In fact, he
[Amit Varma]: just wants to be seen as pro poor. And, you know, at the root of all of this is, can I
[Amit Varma]: get a rhetorical advantage from these things, and not a concern of whether those policies
[Amit Varma]: will do harm or do good. And demon, of course, which, you know, I call the largest assault
[Amit Varma]: on property rights in human history, was incredibly harmful for our economy. And we hardly need
[Amit Varma]: to elaborate on that. But even sort of apart from that, the very next year, they do GST,
[Amit Varma]: which is a great idea, but which again, they managed to botch up in the way they they do
[Guest]: it. Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: Yes. So as you're saying, I don't put it so starkly. But you know, Mr. Modi does not display
[Guest]: an ability to go to the roots of a problem. He does not seem to ask the questions why
[Guest]: something is happening. Why is there black money in the economy? He's very happy to,
[Guest]: you know, come up with a scheme, which seems very grand. And it's the same approach, you
[Guest]: know, for various economic policy decisions, but especially also for GST, where the very
[Guest]: fact that his government has come up with the GST, and you know, he wants to launch
[Guest]: it in the midnight session of Parliament, joint session of Parliament, his whole focus
[Guest]: is on that. And his because of political complications, the GST Council has come up with, you know,
[Guest]: multiple rate GST, which is very difficult to collect. And, you know, it is highly complicated.
[Guest]: The collection of the GST is highly more than the rate structure, I described in the book
[Guest]: how it is the compliances and the, you know, the collection mechanism, which is really
[Guest]: complicated. He has not concerned himself as much with those aspects of GST. Further,
[Guest]: you know, GST becomes, you know, a tool for political messaging. Before Gujarat elections,
[Guest]: there are certain items, you know, which are closer to the hearts of Gujaratis, the GST
[Guest]: rate on that is reduced. Now, a tax system which is sold as a reform to become a means
[Guest]: of political messaging, tells you a lot, you know, about the whole approach of the Modi
[Guest]: government to reforms in GST. I mean, I can't see why, you know, Mr. Modi did not approach
[Guest]: the whole GST designing issue more, in a more fundamental way. How is it that GST became
[Guest]: what it has today? I cannot imagine it is because the pressure was from the state governments
[Guest]: in the GST council for the GST to be like this, because the example of the Gujarati
[Guest]: savories, the rates on it, that has come from the BJP ruled state, you know, it is obviously
[Guest]: influenced by the BJP's politics and not by the other state governments. So clearly, you
[Guest]: know, a tax reform becomes a tool for political messaging and gets botched up in the process.
[Guest]: And there's no thought given to what it will do in the economy, what it will do for taxpayers
[Guest]: and how it will make life very difficult for those, you know, people who now suddenly overnight
[Guest]: become exposed to the tax jurisdictions. If you're doing business in, you know, all the
[Guest]: 20 plus states, you're going to now have to be exposed to the tax jurisdictions of tax
[Guest]: authorities of 28 states, not just the center and that one state where you operate, you
[Guest]: know, so that obviously has not been thought through.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I've had a few episodes in GST as well, which again, I'll link these are like pet
[Amit Varma]: subjects demon in GST. You know, one of the sort of things that struck me about the book
[Amit Varma]: is that the two men who were prime minister through this period, are both extremes in
[Amit Varma]: a bad way. For example, I couldn't help but contrast the fact that Manmohan simply did
[Amit Varma]: not assert himself enough, the PMO was very weak during his time, and he allowed Pranab
[Amit Varma]: to do all these things, even when he knew that, you know, they would harm the nation.
[Amit Varma]: And on the opposite side, you see Modi who goes to the other extreme, and he doesn't
[Amit Varma]: consult any experts or you know, even though they're available to him, he doesn't take
[Amit Varma]: considered decisions, he is just too decisive, he just goes ahead and does whatever the hell
[Amit Varma]: he wants. And some of it is absolutely disastrous for us. So it's a contrast between a PM who
[Amit Varma]: is perhaps too weak, and a PM against who is perhaps asserting himself too much. And
[Amit Varma]: equally, it's a contrast between what seems to be a policy paralysis, not just of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, in the in the senses typically used of officials and so on during UPA2, but also
[Amit Varma]: in terms of the indecisiveness of Manmohan himself, versus the speedy and bad decision
[Amit Varma]: making of Modi. And it's an interesting contrast. And just thinking aloud as I asked this question,
[Amit Varma]: it strikes me that isn't politics more likely to come up with the second kind of leader
[Amit Varma]: like Modi because he has more of these qualities which make for a good politician leave governance
[Amit Varma]: aside. And Manmohan, after all, was sort of an accidental politician in a sense, and therefore
[Amit Varma]: we are more likely to get Modi's than Manmohan's.
[Guest]: I absolutely agree that, you know, speedy decisions, supporters of Mr. Modi, you know,
[Guest]: one of the things that they say is that he's very decisive, and he takes quick decisions.
[Guest]: And supposedly a great thing about the current government, the Modi government is that, you
[Guest]: know, they take decisions, I mean, with a surprise, there's an element of surprise,
[Guest]: we find out about it, then they announce it. I'm not sure those are good qualities. And
[Guest]: I don't know why they're celebrated. You know, all this discourse that happens on whether
[Guest]: something is a policy is good or bad, ideally should be preceded, you know, by the announcement.
[Guest]: I mean, it should happen before the government makes up its mind, the government does not
[Guest]: take on board all these analysis for the simple reason that it does not share its decision
[Guest]: making, you know, well in advance, it only announces decisions. And I mean, speedy decisions
[Guest]: are not necessarily good quality decisions, you know, so that certainly is a thing. And
[Guest]: I also agree that Mr. Modi and Dr. Manmohan Singh are a study in contrasts. And, you know,
[Guest]: a political system is more likely to come up with leaders who are perceived as strong
[Guest]: rather than wise and sensitive. But in the current case, Amit, I would say that it is
[Guest]: also likely that, you know, if you notice, at least I feel so that Mr. Modi has at all
[Guest]: points pitched himself as absolute opposite to Dr. Manmohan Singh. It is because Dr. Manmohan
[Guest]: Singh was called the weakest Prime Minister ever by Ms. Sushma Swaraj and Mr. Arun Jaitley
[Guest]: in Parliament, which I also quote in the book, because he was the weakest, therefore, Mr.
[Guest]: Modi is presented as the strongest, you know, so the plan or the, you know, the way they
[Guest]: have strategized, perhaps, I don't know, I'm not, you know, I don't know what goes on in
[Guest]: the BJP. I'm not a political reporter. But looking at it from the outside, it is one,
[Guest]: you know, it is possible that the strategy is that, you know, Dr. Manmohan Singh is the
[Guest]: weakest. So we have the solution to that we have the strongest, you know, that could also
[Amit Varma]: be a possibility. Yeah, I think you sell yourself short by saying you're not a political reporter.
[Amit Varma]: I think your book is packed with political insight. And, you know, I'm going to have
[Amit Varma]: to end with one last question. But before I ask that question, I feel like I haven't
[Amit Varma]: done justice to this book at all. So the next time you write a book, kindly give me six
[Amit Varma]: hours of your time and come to the studio. And yeah, so here's the last sort of question
[Amit Varma]: coming up for you, which is that, if you look forward to just the next five years of India's
[Amit Varma]: economy, you know, leave aside of who wins the selections and so on, just if you look
[Amit Varma]: forward to the next five years of India's economy, what's the best case scenario and
[Guest]: what's the worst case scenario?
[Guest]: So looking at the next five years, if I look at it as a continuation of the last 10 years,
[Guest]: you know, unlike a lot of people, I do not see the last 10 years as Mr. Modi versus Dr.
[Guest]: Singh. And I don't see too many differences between the UPA2 and the Modi government.
[Guest]: What I see is that there is a certain slide and a certain failures and weakening of institutions
[Guest]: that starts in UPA2, perhaps even before that, but I begin to document it in UPA2. And that
[Guest]: slide deepens, you know, and takes proportions that in recent, you know, memory, we have
[Guest]: not seen that happens in Mr. Modi's time. Now, if this slide continues, if it is not
[Guest]: addressed, the worst case scenario is that we are already seeing the economy is slowing
[Guest]: down once again. This time round, in the earlier phases, you know, whenever the economy was
[Guest]: slowing down in the last 10 years, a fiscal stimulus or a correction in global oil prices,
[Guest]: or some little bit economic policy decisions, generating positivity, succeeded in, you know,
[Guest]: a small pickup in the economic growth rate, that may not have that kind of impact now.
[Guest]: So what I'm trying to say is that stopping this slowdown and reversing it will not be
[Guest]: as easy as it is, it has been in the last 10 years, you cannot just do a fiscal stimulus
[Guest]: or a monetary stimulus and genuinely, you know, turn the trajectory, you're going to
[Guest]: have to take some very tough decisions. Because we have wasted 10 years, you know, the need
[Guest]: to take those difficult decisions has increased even more. And I quote in the book, the IMF
[Guest]: article for both at the time of just before the 2014 elections and after that, where it
[Guest]: clearly says that India is well past the stage where simple monetary and fiscal policy stimulus
[Guest]: is going to, you know, be able to sustain growth momentum, it needs to do the hard reforms.
[Guest]: And the main hard reform that they say is building human capital, which is the most
[Guest]: difficult thing to do, you have to fix your education policy, you have to do something
[Guest]: about public health. And it's only then, you know, that the true entrepreneurial capacity
[Guest]: of Indians and potential of Indians will be unleashed. And that will translate into a
[Guest]: collective economic growth, the demographic dividends that was being celebrated before
[Guest]: the global financial crisis on the basis of which, you know, all the investments had been
[Guest]: made in India, that demographic dividend could turn into a nightmare, you know, if the difficult
[Guest]: decisions on reforms are not taken, and these youngsters cannot be, you know, gainfully
[Guest]: employed in economic activity. The other thing is that, you know, the last 10 years, most
[Guest]: of what has gone wrong is policy induced and mainly self inflicted wounds. There is very
[Guest]: little, you know, which is because of external shocks, the taper tantrum, there's a small
[Guest]: episode, which is a macroeconomic shock, the oil prices, small episode, that's an external
[Guest]: shock. But other than that, everything that's going wrong is because of wrong policies that
[Guest]: are being taken decisions that are being taken. And I see no signs of realization of how these
[Guest]: decisions are poor quality decisions. And you look at, if you look at, you know, the
[Guest]: farm prices, there's a long subsection of the farm prices in the book. You know, first,
[Guest]: the Modi government experiments with MSP plus, you know, what they've promised, then they
[Guest]: come up with the 6000 rupees, you know, PM Kisan scheme. In response to that, the Congress
[Guest]: has come up with their Nehai scheme. And I call this the rise of populism. And in fact,
[Guest]: the triumph of populism. But none of this is the real solution that the agriculture
[Guest]: sector needs. And there is obviously no realization of that. There is no realization of why there
[Guest]: is a job crisis. Make in India has taken, you know, has slipped off the priority list.
[Guest]: So if we continue on this trajectory, the five things that I see is that almost immediately,
[Guest]: you know, your growth momentum will slow down. We've already seen signs of that when we see
[Guest]: production cuts announced by Maruti, etc. Two wheelers and all demand is the early indicators.
[Guest]: And so, you know, a growth momentum slowdown, which means that your job crisis is not get
[Guest]: taken care of, which means you're going to have this huge army of youngsters who are
[Guest]: not gainfully employed in the economy, full of energy and perhaps soon frustration and
[Guest]: huge unmet expectations. If you have a farm crisis, you know, I don't know what, how that
[Guest]: will have implications for food security and inflation. Yeah, so I said it's a farm crisis
[Guest]: and I said it's the growth momentum. And therefore the job crisis, you know, without growth,
[Guest]: all the youngsters who we've been talking about is the demographic dividend and who,
[Guest]: you know, we're going to get these jobs and earn, make these incomes and therefore be
[Guest]: that big market. You know, the whole promise of why there should be investments in India,
[Guest]: that cycle gets broken and that's the economic point side of it. But, you know, all these
[Guest]: youngsters with incomes not commensurate with their aspirations and lifestyles not commensurate
[Guest]: with what they were promised and that demographic dividend will turn into a demographic nightmare
[Guest]: and it will lead to all kinds of other social and maybe political problems. So that, and
[Guest]: so I mean, everything that policy determines you, we are already in, on the exports front,
[Guest]: we are already losing our comparative advantage to other economies that are, you know, sort
[Guest]: of working very hard and therefore, you know, gaining. And because we are not even, you
[Guest]: know, working hard to stay where we are, we are losing global position, you know, in textiles,
[Guest]: et cetera. We were second only to China. We, you know, other countries are now ahead of
[Guest]: us. We are no longer the second largest exporters. You know, we've slipped on the pecking order
[Guest]: and you know, these are all cycles. Once you begin to lose your advantage, then it just
[Guest]: multiplies because these are very highly competitive industries where, you know, small margins
[Guest]: lead to huge, it's the volumes game. So, you know, you lose an order, you lose big volumes,
[Guest]: you suddenly slip down the position, you lose further orders to the export side, especially
[Guest]: where there are labor intensive industries that you begin to hurt. And finally, that
[Guest]: brings me to the point that, you know, if you're economically not secure and doing well
[Guest]: and your economic momentum does not have strength, this whole argument that people keep making
[Guest]: about national security, it has ramifications for national security. If you're an economy
[Guest]: doing very well, your growth momentum, you know, is promising and the world is looking
[Guest]: to trade with you and do business with you and come and invest in you. And, you know,
[Guest]: your young demographic dividend is just going to pay off. You're this huge market. Your
[Guest]: difficult neighbors will take you, their approach to you is going to be very different than
[Guest]: your difficult neighbors approach to you when you're an economy dealing with an investment
[Guest]: crisis, a pharma crisis, and you know, the youth out on the roads because their jobs
[Guest]: are not as good as they wanted. Can you see the difference in approach of your difficult
[Guest]: neighbors to hold your, you know, issues that are of national security concern, which you
[Guest]: right now think, you know, you're doing very well on national security? That whole thing
[Guest]: becomes into question and the whole approach of your neighbors cannot be taken for granted
[Guest]: if internally you are economically not that strong and secure.
[Amit Varma]: These are all very enlightening points. And in fact, I have episodes on jobs and agriculture
[Amit Varma]: as well, which we linked from the episode page. You know, on the one hand, I despair
[Amit Varma]: that there is no political will to do anything about any of the problems that we face. But
[Amit Varma]: on the other hand, I have hope because people like you are writing the kind of book that
[Amit Varma]: you just wrote and which I learned a lot from. Thank you so much for coming on the scene
[Amit Varma]: in The Unseen, Pooja.
[Guest]: Thanks, Amrita. It's been great to talk to you and be on your show.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do hop over to your nearest bookstore and
[Amit Varma]: pick up The Lost Decade by Pooja Mehra. You can follow Pooja on Twitter at Pooja Mehra
[Amit Varma]: P-U-J-A-M-E-H-R-A. That's P-U-J-A-M-E-H-R-A at Twitter. You can follow me at Amit Verma,
[Amit Varma]: A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. The Seen and The Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution,
[Amit Varma]: an independent center for research and education in public policy. You can browse all our past
[Amit Varma]: episodes at seenunseen.in and thinkpragati.com. Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Hi my name is Anupam Gupta. I'm B-50 on Twitter. I am the host of Paisa Paisa, the show that
[Unknown]: talks money. On my show, I speak to experts from every field of money and finance from
[Unknown]: stock markets, equities, debt funds, credit cards, life insurance, every possible area
[Unknown]: of money and finance that you can think of. We even did an episode on cryptocurrency.
[Unknown]: I've got fantastic guests from mutual funds to personal finance experts everywhere. Robo
[Unknown]: advisory startups, just name it, we've got it. At Paisa Paisa, we help you make smart
[Unknown]: decisions about money. You work hard for money. Now make your money work hard for you. New
[Unknown]: episodes out every Monday and you can listen to my show on the IBM podcast app or any other
[Unknown]: podcasting app that you have. Paisa Paisa is brought to you by Paytm Money.
[Unknown]: Filter coffee is a fascinating beverage. You need to pick the right beans, blend them in
[Unknown]: the right proportion, roast them to perfection and slow brew at the right temperature to
[Unknown]: get the perfect cup, which is exactly like great conversations as well. You need to track
[Unknown]: down the most interesting minds, get them into their zone and settle down for an unhurried,
[Unknown]: unscripted chat. And coffee for me is always, always, always best enjoyed with friends.
[Unknown]: I'm Karthik Nagarajan and do share my table as I meet some of the most interesting people
[Unknown]: I know and sit them down for a strong cup of coffee and an even stronger conversation.
[Unknown]: Join me every Wednesday for a freshly brewed episode. This is not frappe. This is the filter
[Unknown]: coffee podcast.